In this screencast, let's take a look at a Jupyter notebook and let's try
to see how one might approach analyzing and making sense of a 3D medical imaging dataset.
In this Jupyter notebook,
let's discuss some methods which could be applied to
analyzing large amounts of 3D volumes.
This is where it becomes a little bit creative depending
on how many volumes you have and all these datasets,
you might employ different methods.
You would have to definitely deal with the amount
of space that you need in order to load all these volumes.
If this is a huge dataset,
you might be thinking about
some research storage databases or large-scale in-memory databases but for now,
I will show you something that you might be willing to take
a look at if you are trying to make sense of the dataset.
Again, we are using the same collection of libraries, pydicom, matplotlib, numpy.
So let's import those and then let us load our series metadata.
Our series metadata sitting in this data folder and you
will get access to that if you download the files that come with
this lesson and we will just use
this code to load all of the slices as this Python tuples into memory.
This might not be the most efficient way to do
this if you don't have a lot of RAM but if you have a lot of RAM,
this will allow us to very quickly process these files.
Note one thing though,
when I'm calling this DCM read function,
I have this parameter that I'm passing,
which is called stop_before_pixels.
A lot of DICOM processing libraries in many languages have something like that.
This basically allows you to tell that you do not want to load pixels,
you only want to load metadata. This is what we want to do.
We want to look at some metadata and see
what's common and what's different about all those files.
So let us just print one and see what we got in there.
The first thing I would look at is the subclass UID,
it says MR image storage.
I can count on that because I know that this is
a mandatory data element that has to be in DICOM.
So probably we're dealing with MRI dataset.
Let's scroll through that,
so we see date here,
we see time, which seems to be meaningful.
This is good when you know how series relate to each other in time.
We see some modality names, manufacturer names.
There are descriptions, so study have
meaningful descriptions and oftentimes the description
are free text and oftentimes in descriptions you will
find information that tells you what was the acquisition sequence,
like in series description,
for example, for this one it says T1post.
Remember how we talked about MRI scanners and physical principles of
operations and how we talked about pulse sequences and T1 and T2.
T1 tells me that probably this is a T1 sequence.
Post here tells me that probably this is a T1 sequence
that has been acquired after patient has been injected with the contrast agent.
It's a post contrast T1 sequence and this thing it says brains,
so most likely clinicians use
gadolinium as a contrast agent for MR brain
scans and that's most likely what we're dealing with here.
Let's scroll down a little bit and look for another interesting thing.
Since we have a lot of DICOM files,
I want to look at the patient ID here and see if the patient ID could be
meaningful and if I can use it to tell one slide from another.
If I scroll to the section 10,
which has the patient demographics,
the element 1020 is the patient ID and we see
that the patient ID looks like it says PGBM-001.
So looks like it's meaningful.
Let's try to look at some other file.
Let's try to look at series number 4 here.
It says PGBM-001 as well.
Let's try to look at different study here.
Let's load this one up and it says as well, PGBM-001.
Looks like this patient ID thing is pretty consistent.
Let's keep going.
Let's see how many total files do we have in this set of studies.
We have 1,700 files.
That's quite a lot.
How many in different patients do we have?
There are four distinct patient IDs.
I used this numpy unique method to tell apart the patient IDs.
This actually tells me two things.
It tells me that we're most likely dealing with four unique patients
and this also tells me that patient ID is present in every single instance,
which gives me a good intuition that probably I can
rely on patient ID to tell my patients apart.
Let's look at how many total series are we dealing with.
Basically how many 3D volumes do we have.
We have 76 series, which is good.
So 76, we can work with that,
try maybe some algorithms.
Let us try to see how patient studies and series lineup.
How many studies do we have?
We have eight studies in total and let's see how many studies do we have per patient?
So after running this code,
we group the studies by patient.
We can see that each one of our four patients have two studies. This is good.
The two studies basically means that
most likely we're dealing with some longitudinal studies.
Let us take a look at this directory in the file system.
If I open my file system,
my MR series, my first patient,
I can see that there are two studies here
and judging by the description and judging by the date,
which was conveniently printed into the study directory,
I can conclude that most likely we're dealing with a sequence of
studies which are in this case seem to be a year apart.
So probably every pair
of those studies correspond to two different points of time of this patient's care.
Let's see how many series do we have per study?
We have 10 series in most of those studies and we have six series in one of those.
Let's take a quick look at that one on the file system.
It's patient number 6.
There are six series here in one of the studies.
The study seems to have the six series and the other ones looks like they're a
bit recent than the one we've just looked at.
So this is 96 and 97.
The 96 one has 10 series,
the 97 has six series.
Looks like some sequences are missing,
most likely from this one.
We need to keep taking mental notes here,
maybe it will be relying on those sequences.
Some other studies in the dataset might be missing those.
Let's see how many images do we have per series.
Let's plot all of those. This is pretty consistent.
A lot of series have 24-25 images,
so probably this is some thick slice CT dataset.
One other thing that I would like to look at,
I would like to look at in-plane resolution.
Are we consistent with the resolution?
While I'm at it, because I'll be looping through all the series,
I will look at pixel spacing.
This is my in-plane resolution, essentially.
I will look at the amount of pixels that we have in each slice.
These are DICOM parameters that are called rows and
columns and I will look at the z-axis resolution,
which is the slice thickness.
Let me collect those and these three arrays.
Let's look at the slice thickness first.
How many thicknesses do we have here?
You see what I'm doing here,
basically adding those into a dictionary so that I
can group those by values that we have in the dataset.
Looks like some of the images have value of five and some
of the values are stored as floating point,
but looks like we're pretty consistent as far as slice thickness goes. That's great.
Let's look at pixel spacing.
Let's see if all the pixel spacing is consistent.
Remember, pixel spacing is the dimensions of our pixels in the acquisition plane.
This is interesting because this is not very consistent.
We have some variety here.
We have pixels which are 0.68 by 0.68,
and we have pixels which are 0.42 by 0.42.
Let's visualize it and let's print all the values and see what is happening here.
So these are lower resolution ones where we have more pixels.
We have some series here which are from 1991,
1992, and we have this T1pre, T2pre, FLAIR.
So it looks like these are all kinds of sequences,
just from the early '90s in this dataset.
So let's look at the ones which are smaller pixels.
So we can see that the smallest one,
this 0.42 they're from 1997 and 1996,
and they correspond to mask.
So our dataset contains mask,
so this is a different type of sequence which is good.
Also, there's one T1pre req sequence which is a T1 sequence,
a sequence from 1992 which has different pixel spacing.
This is something I should take a mental note of because if I'm going to be
combining all those volumes into a dataset and feeding that to a neural network,
I need to remember to resemble them.
So all the volumes have similar meaning as far as pixel size goes.
One other thing that I want to look at as I'm looking at this,
I want to know that some of those 0.42 ones also correspond to T2 sequences.
So I have some T2 sequences which have the smaller sized pixels,
and then I have some of the T2 sequences which have some larger sized pixels.
If I look at those, the smaller T2 finer, If I should say,
T2 sequences are from the late '90s,
and the coarser T2 sequences,
they are from the early '90s.
So probably, the dataset that I'm dealing with,
obviously has been acquired through maybe a decade,
and maybe these were just a scanner technology
has improved as hospital got access to better scanners,
the scans became more detailed.
Lastly, let us look at the in-plane resolution.
What are we dealing with here?
We can see that we have 320 by 260 series,
a lot of those, and we have 512 by 512 series.
So this is some discrepancy in the image sizes.
Again, let's do the same trick as we just did,
let's just print all of those and see which ones are which.
We can see that for the 512 by 512 ones, again,
we have some of those newer T2 sequences,
so obviously these are the newer series.
The 320 by 260, again,
we have T2 here but they are older.
Again, this confirms my mental note that I just took that I need to make sure that
I do not forget to resemble them and bring them to the same resolution.
One other thing that I could do at this point is to visualize some of
those images and see how well they align with each other.
To do that, I will pick some random series.
I will pick a T1 series from one study from this patient 3,
and I will pick a FLAIR series from the same patient.
Let's just see if this series would line up,
if they have the same orientation.
Remember how we talked about orientation,
this image orientation patient, image position patient?
I would just do a spot check and see if it checks out for these two.
Let us do the same trick with converting
this icon pixel array into a NumPy three dimensional array,
and let us just print all of the image position values,
so image position patient values for the T1 slices,
and let us do the same for the FLAIR slices.
So I can see that these values are not at zero.
So probably, these values have not been cleaned,
this series have not been pre-processed,
looks like it's an original acquisition.
I can see how the z value changes,
so this means that our slices aligned around the z-axis.
I can see that the y-axis also changes, actually.
This tells me that our slices are not perfectly aligned around the axis.
Let us take look at the other one,
at the FLAIR slices.
I can see that, actually, values look to be the same here.
This is good. This tells me that actually,
these images are probably aligned with each other well.
Let's confirm that, let's subtract one array from another.
I have the image orientation patient here.
Actually, let's take a look at the image orientation.
So let's do the same trick and then just subtract values.
We can see that image orientation patient value are the same in these two sequence.
Most likely, the image position patient would be the same as well,
but let me just quickly confirmed that.
So let's change this code and let's change orientation for position.
Yes, image position patient is also exactly the same which tells me
that these series are most likely registered.
Actually, if I look at the filenames here,
and this comes from the series description,
it has this prereg appendix here.
Probably, someone put it there to
designate that this series have been registered together.
Well, at this point,
let me visualize these two overlaid on top of each other just to confirm,
and I'm using this trick of just adding those up and multiplying by some constant.
Yes, this series seems to be aligned,
nothing is taken out.
This is the end of this exercise.
There are a lot of more things that you can do with a DICOM 3D volume datasets.
So depending on what you're trying to do,
you can try and confirm probably if all of the series align with each other nicely,
you can look at some photometric things and see if all the pixel values are aligning.
You could probably load up some of the data into
slicer and get a feel of what it looks like and what you're looking at,
you would probably want to look at the ground truth.
But by just going through this few simple transformation,
let's see what we've learned about this dataset. We learned quite a lot.
Without knowing anything about this dataset,
we learn that we are dealing with MRI images,
we learn that we have data from four patients,
we learn that each patient has two studies representing two time points,
two longitudinal studies, we learn that each study has
between 8 and 10 sequences and 76 3D volumes altogether,
and we have the 1,700 slices.
By the way, if you would be doing something
with neural networks and analyzing this images slice by slice,
as we will see in the next lesson,
maybe this would be good enough to start training something.
We have this variation and pixel spacing,
so this tells us that we need to do some resampling.
We have pretty consistent slice thickness and we have
some low-resolution older slices combined with high resolution newer slices.
So we need to be aware of that.
We need to be aware that our sequences are not that consistent.
One other thing that we have learned,
that our volumes seemed to be registered together which means that we
do not need to do any automatic registration.
This is a lot that we have learned from just looking at this,
from executing a few dozen lines of code
and looking at some of the outputs of the DICOM metadata.
So we have just seen a quick screen cast of how you would approach
a exploratory data analysis problem for a 3D medical imaging dataset.
There are many ways to do that.
I encourage you to take this notebook and try things out yourself.
Good luck with your explorations.